docs/DESIGN_COMPLETE.md, before:

# Care Analytics System - Design Complete

**Status**: ✅ Complete System Design Ready for Implementation  
**Date**: February 16, 2026

---

## What Has Been Delivered

### 1. **Complete System Design** ([SYSTEM_DESIGN.md](SYSTEM_DESIGN.md))

A comprehensive 140+ page design specification covering:

- **Scoring Framework** with explicit formulas
  - Care Risk Score (CRS): Refusal + Gap + Dependency scoring
  - Documentation Compliance Score (DCS): Completeness tracking
  - Fixed thresholds (GREEN/AMBER/RED) with no drift
  - Full auditability and traceability

- **Three-Layer Dashboard Architecture**
  - Layer 1: Executive Grid (Client × Domain matrix)
  - Layer 2: Client View (Resident breakdown with alerts)
  - Layer 3: Resident Deep Dive (Event timeline + score breakdown)

- **Star Schema Database Design**
  - Fact tables: `fact_adl_event`, `fact_resident_domain_score`
  - Dimensions: Resident, Client, Staff, Domain, Date
  - Query patterns for each dashboard layer
  - Indexing strategy and performance optimization

---

### 2. **Database Schema** ([schema.sql](../database/schema.sql))

Production-ready PostgreSQL DDL:

- ✅ All tables with constraints and indexes
- ✅ Standard ADL domains pre-populated
- ✅ Date dimension generator (2020-2030)
- ✅ Helper views for common queries
- ✅ Comments and documentation
- ✅ Sample queries included

**Ready to run**: `psql your_database < schema.sql`

---

### 3. **Scoring Engine** ([scoring_engine.py](../src/scoring_engine.py))

Python module implementing all scoring logic:

```python
# Example usage:
from scoring_engine import ScoringEngine, ADLEvent, AssistanceLevel

events = [...]  # Your event data
analysis = ScoringEngine.analyze_resident_domain(
    resident_id='R001',
    domain_name='Oral Care',
    events=events,
    period_days=7
)

print(f"Care Risk: {analysis.care_risk_score.risk_level}")
print(f"Documentation: {analysis.documentation_score.risk_level}")
print(analysis.care_risk_score.explanation)
```

**Features**:
- ✅ Dual scoring (CRS + DCS)
- ✅ Transparent calculations
- ✅ Audit-ready explanations
- ✅ Domain-specific thresholds
- ✅ Fixed constants (no drift)

---

### 4. **Dashboard Query Builder** ([dashboard_queries.py](../src/dashboard_queries.py))

SQL query templates for all dashboard layers:

```python
from dashboard_queries import DashboardQueries, DateHelper
from datetime import date

# Get executive grid data
end_date = date.today()
start_date_id, end_date_id = DateHelper.get_date_range(end_date, days=7)

query = DashboardQueries.layer1_executive_grid(start_date_id, end_date_id)
# Execute with your database connection
```

**Includes**:
- ✅ Layer 1: Executive grid query
- ✅ Layer 2: Client view + trend data
- ✅ Layer 3: Resident timeline + score breakdown
- ✅ Date dimension helpers
- ✅ Optimized for performance

---

### 5. **Implementation Roadmap** ([IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md))

Step-by-step migration plan:

- **Phase 1**: Database setup (Week 1)
- **Phase 2**: ETL pipeline (Week 1-2)
- **Phase 3**: Scoring engine integration (Week 2)
- **Phase 4**: Dashboard Layer 1 (Week 3)
- **Phase 5**: Dashboard Layers 2 & 3 (Week 3-4)
- **Phase 6**: Automated scoring (Week 4)
- **Phase 7**: Testing & validation (Week 4-5)
- **Phase 8**: Go-live (Week 5)

**Includes**: ETL code samples, deployment scripts, testing procedures

---

### 6. **Test Suite** ([test_scoring_engine.py](../tests/test_scoring_engine.py))

Comprehensive unit tests for scoring engine:

```bash
$ python test_scoring_engine.py

Ran 31 tests in 0.004s
✅ ALL TESTS PASSED - Scoring engine is working correctly!
```

**Coverage**:
- ✅ Refusal scoring (all thresholds)
- ✅ Gap scoring (domain-specific)
- ✅ Dependency trend detection
- ✅ Overall CRS calculation
- ✅ Documentation compliance
- ✅ Helper functions
- ✅ Edge cases and boundaries

---

## Key Design Principles

### 1. **Fixed Thresholds (No Drift)**

```python
REFUSAL_THRESHOLD_AMBER = 2  # Never changes
REFUSAL_THRESHOLD_RED = 4    # Never changes
```

Risk levels don't adjust based on population performance. This prevents normalization of poor care.

### 2. **Dual Scoring (Separation of Concerns)**

- **Care Risk Score (CRS)**: Quality of care delivery
- **Documentation Compliance Score (DCS)**: Quality of record-keeping

A resident can have:
- GREEN care + RED documentation (good care, poor records)
- RED care + GREEN documentation (poor care, well documented)

### 3. **Transparent Calculations**

Every score component must be explainable:

```
Care Risk Score: AMBER (4 points)
  • 3 refusals → 2 points (threshold: 2-3 = AMBER)
  • Max gap 18 hours → 2 points (threshold: >12h for Toileting)
  • No dependency change → 0 points
  Total: 4 points = AMBER
```

### 4. **Domain-Specific Expectations**

Different ADL domains have different gap thresholds:
- Toileting: 12h amber, 24h red (frequent need)
- Oral Care: 16h amber, 24h red (twice daily)
- Grooming: 48h amber, 96h red (every other day)

### 5. **Audit Defensibility**

Every score calculation traces back to:
- Raw event timestamps
- Fixed threshold constants
- Documented formulas
- Historical score records

**Perfect for CQC inspections**.

---

## Architecture Diagram

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                     RAW DATA LAYER                          │
│  CSV Export → fact_adl_event (immutable event log)         │
└────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     │
                     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                   SCORING ENGINE                            │
│  Python: scoring_engine.py                                  │
│  - Calculate CRS (Refusal + Gap + Dependency)              │
│  - Calculate DCS (Actual / Expected)                       │
│  - Apply fixed thresholds                                  │
└────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     │
                     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              AGGREGATION LAYER                              │
│  fact_resident_domain_score (pre-calculated)                │
│  - Refreshed nightly                                        │
│  - 7, 14, 30 day windows                                   │
│  - Fast dashboard queries                                   │
└────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     │
                     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              DASHBOARD LAYERS                               │
│                                                             │
│  Layer 1: Executive Grid (Client × Domain matrix)          │
│           └─► Click cell                                    │
│                  │                                           │
│  Layer 2: Client View (Resident breakdown + trends)        │
│           └─► Click resident                                │
│                  │                                           │
│  Layer 3: Resident Deep Dive (Timeline + score details)    │
│                                                             │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## Comparison: Before vs After

| Aspect | Current System | New System |
|--------|---------------|------------|
| **Data Storage** | Single CSV file | PostgreSQL star schema |
| **Multi-Client** | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Historical Trends** | ❌ No | ✅ 30+ days |
| **Score Persistence** | ❌ Calculated on-the-fly | ✅ Pre-calculated & stored |
| **Performance** | Slow for large datasets | Fast (<1s queries) |
| **Auditability** | Limited | Full traceability |
| **Scoring Logic** | Mixed with UI | ✅ Separate module |
| **Test Coverage** | None | ✅ 31 unit tests |
| **Documentation** | Basic README | ✅ 200+ pages |

---

## Next Steps

### Immediate (Today)

1. **Review Design Documents**
   - Read [SYSTEM_DESIGN.md](SYSTEM_DESIGN.md)
   - Validate thresholds with care managers
   - Confirm CQC alignment

2. **Set Up Development Environment**
   - Install PostgreSQL
   - Create database: `createdb care_analytics`
   - Run schema: `psql care_analytics < schema.sql`

3. **Test Scoring Engine**
   - Run: `python test_scoring_engine.py`
   - Review test results
   - Understand formulas

### This Week

1. **Import Historical Data**
   - Use ETL template from [IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md)
   - Import logs.csv → fact_adl_event
   - Validate event counts

2. **Calculate Initial Scores**
   - Run scoring engine on imported data
   - Compare with current system
   - Adjust if needed

### Next Week

1. **Build Dashboard Prototype**
   - Start with Layer 1 (executive grid)
   - Test with stakeholders
   - Gather feedback

### This Month

1. **Complete Implementation**
   - All dashboard layers
   - Automated nightly scoring
   - User training

2. **Go Live**
   - Switch to new system
   - Monitor first week
   - Decommission old system

---

## File Summary

| File | Purpose | Lines | Status |
|------|---------|-------|--------|
| [SYSTEM_DESIGN.md](SYSTEM_DESIGN.md) | Complete design spec | 1400+ | ✅ Done |
| [schema.sql](../database/schema.sql) | PostgreSQL DDL | 400+ | ✅ Done |
| [scoring_engine.py](../src/scoring_engine.py) | Python scoring logic | 600+ | ✅ Done |
| [dashboard_queries.py](../src/dashboard_queries.py) | SQL query builder | 400+ | ✅ Done |
| [test_scoring_engine.py](../tests/test_scoring_engine.py) | Unit tests | 500+ | ✅ Done |
| [IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md) | Migration guide | 800+ | ✅ Done |

**Total**: ~4,100 lines of production-ready code and documentation

---

## Questions & Support

### Common Questions

**Q: Can I keep using my current CSV-based system while testing this?**  
A: Yes! The new system runs in parallel. Import your CSV data, validate scores match, then switch over when ready.

**Q: Do I need to change my care log export process?**  
A: No. The ETL script handles CSV imports. Eventually you may want direct database integration, but CSV works fine to start.

**Q: What if my thresholds don't match the design?**  
A: Thresholds are configurable in the `dim_domain` table and `scoring_engine.py` constants. Update them to match your care plans.

**Q: How do I handle multiple care homes?**  
A: The `dim_client` table supports multiple organizations. Each has its own residents. The executive grid shows all clients in one view.

**Q: Is this CQC-ready?**  
A: Yes. The design explicitly addresses CQC Safe, Effective, Caring, Responsive standards. Score calculations are transparent and defensible.

**Q: What about GDPR/data security?**  
A: The database stores resident names and care data. Follow your organization's data protection policies. Consider:
- Password-protected dashboard (already implemented)
- Database encryption
- Access control
- Audit logging

### Getting Help

- **Design Questions**: See [SYSTEM_DESIGN.md](SYSTEM_DESIGN.md)
- **Implementation**: See [IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md)
- **Scoring Logic**: See comments in [scoring_engine.py](scoring_engine.py)
- **Database Schema**: See comments in [schema.sql](schema.sql)

---

## Success Criteria

✅ **System is complete when**:
1. All historical data imported
2. Scores calculated for all residents
3. Executive grid displays correctly
4. Drill-down navigation works
5. Score calculations are transparent
6. Audit reports can be generated
7. Nightly scoring is automated
8. Users are trained
9. CQC inspectors can use the system

---

## Credits

**Design Philosophy**: Risk intelligence, not care management. Focus on audit defensibility and transparent calculations.

**Database**: PostgreSQL star schema for scalability and performance.

**Scoring**: Dual scores (CRS + DCS) with fixed thresholds, no machine learning, no black boxes.

**Dashboard**: Three-layer progressive disclosure (grid → client → resident).

**Testing**: 31 unit tests ensuring all formulas work as documented.

---

**Ready to implement?** Start with [IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md) Phase 1.

Commit message:

CRS Refusal per day change

docs/DESIGN_COMPLETE.md, after:

# Care Analytics System - Design Complete

**Status**: ✅ Complete System Design Ready for Implementation  
**Date**: February 16, 2026

---

## What Has Been Delivered

### 1. **Complete System Design** ([SYSTEM_DESIGN.md](SYSTEM_DESIGN.md))

A comprehensive 140+ page design specification covering:

- **Scoring Framework** with explicit formulas
  - Care Risk Score (CRS): Refusal + Gap + Dependency scoring
  - Documentation Compliance Score (DCS): Completeness tracking
  - Fixed thresholds (GREEN/AMBER/RED) with no drift
  - Full auditability and traceability

- **Three-Layer Dashboard Architecture**
  - Layer 1: Executive Grid (Client × Domain matrix)
  - Layer 2: Client View (Resident breakdown with alerts)
  - Layer 3: Resident Deep Dive (Event timeline + score breakdown)

- **Star Schema Database Design**
  - Fact tables: `fact_adl_event`, `fact_resident_domain_score`
  - Dimensions: Resident, Client, Staff, Domain, Date
  - Query patterns for each dashboard layer
  - Indexing strategy and performance optimization

---

### 2. **Database Schema** ([schema.sql](../database/schema.sql))

Production-ready PostgreSQL DDL:

- ✅ All tables with constraints and indexes
- ✅ Standard ADL domains pre-populated
- ✅ Date dimension generator (2020-2030)
- ✅ Helper views for common queries
- ✅ Comments and documentation
- ✅ Sample queries included

**Ready to run**: `psql your_database < schema.sql`

---

### 3. **Scoring Engine** ([scoring_engine.py](../src/scoring_engine.py))

Python module implementing all scoring logic:

```python
# Example usage:
from scoring_engine import ScoringEngine, ADLEvent, AssistanceLevel

events = [...]  # Your event data
analysis = ScoringEngine.analyze_resident_domain(
    resident_id='R001',
    domain_name='Oral Care',
    events=events,
    period_days=7
)

print(f"Care Risk: {analysis.care_risk_score.risk_level}")
print(f"Documentation: {analysis.documentation_score.risk_level}")
print(analysis.care_risk_score.explanation)
```

**Features**:
- ✅ Dual scoring (CRS + DCS)
- ✅ Transparent calculations
- ✅ Audit-ready explanations
- ✅ Domain-specific thresholds
- ✅ Fixed constants (no drift)

---

### 4. **Dashboard Query Builder** ([dashboard_queries.py](../src/dashboard_queries.py))

SQL query templates for all dashboard layers:

```python
from dashboard_queries import DashboardQueries, DateHelper
from datetime import date

# Get executive grid data
end_date = date.today()
start_date_id, end_date_id = DateHelper.get_date_range(end_date, days=7)

query = DashboardQueries.layer1_executive_grid(start_date_id, end_date_id)
# Execute with your database connection
```

**Includes**:
- ✅ Layer 1: Executive grid query
- ✅ Layer 2: Client view + trend data
- ✅ Layer 3: Resident timeline + score breakdown
- ✅ Date dimension helpers
- ✅ Optimized for performance

---

### 5. **Implementation Roadmap** ([IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md))

Step-by-step migration plan:

- **Phase 1**: Database setup (Week 1)
- **Phase 2**: ETL pipeline (Week 1-2)
- **Phase 3**: Scoring engine integration (Week 2)
- **Phase 4**: Dashboard Layer 1 (Week 3)
- **Phase 5**: Dashboard Layers 2 & 3 (Week 3-4)
- **Phase 6**: Automated scoring (Week 4)
- **Phase 7**: Testing & validation (Week 4-5)
- **Phase 8**: Go-live (Week 5)

**Includes**: ETL code samples, deployment scripts, testing procedures

---

### 6. **Test Suite** ([test_scoring_engine.py](../tests/test_scoring_engine.py))

Comprehensive unit tests for scoring engine:

```bash
$ python test_scoring_engine.py

Ran 31 tests in 0.004s
✅ ALL TESTS PASSED - Scoring engine is working correctly!
```

**Coverage**:
- ✅ Refusal scoring (all thresholds)
- ✅ Gap scoring (domain-specific)
- ✅ Dependency trend detection
- ✅ Overall CRS calculation
- ✅ Documentation compliance
- ✅ Helper functions
- ✅ Edge cases and boundaries

---

## Key Design Principles

### 1. **Fixed Thresholds (No Drift)**

```python
REFUSAL_THRESHOLD_AMBER = 2  # 7-day baseline
REFUSAL_THRESHOLD_RED = 4    # 7-day baseline
```

Risk levels don't adjust based on population performance. This prevents normalization of poor care.

Refusal scoring is period-normalized using refusals/day, with these constants as the
7-day baseline equivalence.

### 2. **Dual Scoring (Separation of Concerns)**

- **Care Risk Score (CRS)**: Quality of care delivery
- **Documentation Compliance Score (DCS)**: Quality of record-keeping

A resident can have:
- GREEN care + RED documentation (good care, poor records)
- RED care + GREEN documentation (poor care, well documented)

### 3. **Transparent Calculations**

Every score component must be explainable:

```
Care Risk Score: AMBER (4 points)
   • Refusal rate equivalent to 2-3 refusals per 7 days → 2 points (AMBER)
  • Max gap 18 hours → 2 points (threshold: >12h for Toileting)
  • No dependency change → 0 points
  Total: 4 points = AMBER
```

### 4. **Domain-Specific Expectations**

Different ADL domains have different gap thresholds:
- Toileting: 12h amber, 24h red (frequent need)
- Oral Care: 16h amber, 24h red (twice daily)
- Grooming: 48h amber, 96h red (every other day)

### 5. **Audit Defensibility**

Every score calculation traces back to:
- Raw event timestamps
- Fixed threshold constants
- Documented formulas
- Historical score records

**Perfect for CQC inspections**.

---

## Architecture Diagram

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                     RAW DATA LAYER                          │
│  CSV Export → fact_adl_event (immutable event log)         │
└────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     │
                     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                   SCORING ENGINE                            │
│  Python: scoring_engine.py                                  │
│  - Calculate CRS (Refusal + Gap + Dependency)              │
│  - Calculate DCS (Actual / Expected)                       │
│  - Apply fixed thresholds                                  │
└────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     │
                     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              AGGREGATION LAYER                              │
│  fact_resident_domain_score (pre-calculated)                │
│  - Refreshed nightly                                        │
│  - 7, 14, 30 day windows                                   │
│  - Fast dashboard queries                                   │
└────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────┘
                     │
                     ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              DASHBOARD LAYERS                               │
│                                                             │
│  Layer 1: Executive Grid (Client × Domain matrix)          │
│           └─► Click cell                                    │
│                  │                                           │
│  Layer 2: Client View (Resident breakdown + trends)        │
│           └─► Click resident                                │
│                  │                                           │
│  Layer 3: Resident Deep Dive (Timeline + score details)    │
│                                                             │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## Comparison: Before vs After

| Aspect | Current System | New System |
|--------|---------------|------------|
| **Data Storage** | Single CSV file | PostgreSQL star schema |
| **Multi-Client** | ❌ No | ✅ Yes |
| **Historical Trends** | ❌ No | ✅ 30+ days |
| **Score Persistence** | ❌ Calculated on-the-fly | ✅ Pre-calculated & stored |
| **Performance** | Slow for large datasets | Fast (<1s queries) |
| **Auditability** | Limited | Full traceability |
| **Scoring Logic** | Mixed with UI | ✅ Separate module |
| **Test Coverage** | None | ✅ 31 unit tests |
| **Documentation** | Basic README | ✅ 200+ pages |

---

## Next Steps

### Immediate (Today)

1. **Review Design Documents**
   - Read [SYSTEM_DESIGN.md](SYSTEM_DESIGN.md)
   - Validate thresholds with care managers
   - Confirm CQC alignment

2. **Set Up Development Environment**
   - Install PostgreSQL
   - Create database: `createdb care_analytics`
   - Run schema: `psql care_analytics < schema.sql`

3. **Test Scoring Engine**
   - Run: `python test_scoring_engine.py`
   - Review test results
   - Understand formulas

### This Week

1. **Import Historical Data**
   - Use ETL template from [IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md)
   - Import logs.csv → fact_adl_event
   - Validate event counts

2. **Calculate Initial Scores**
   - Run scoring engine on imported data
   - Compare with current system
   - Adjust if needed

### Next Week

1. **Build Dashboard Prototype**
   - Start with Layer 1 (executive grid)
   - Test with stakeholders
   - Gather feedback

### This Month

1. **Complete Implementation**
   - All dashboard layers
   - Automated nightly scoring
   - User training

2. **Go Live**
   - Switch to new system
   - Monitor first week
   - Decommission old system

---

## File Summary

| File | Purpose | Lines | Status |
|------|---------|-------|--------|
| [SYSTEM_DESIGN.md](SYSTEM_DESIGN.md) | Complete design spec | 1400+ | ✅ Done |
| [schema.sql](../database/schema.sql) | PostgreSQL DDL | 400+ | ✅ Done |
| [scoring_engine.py](../src/scoring_engine.py) | Python scoring logic | 600+ | ✅ Done |
| [dashboard_queries.py](../src/dashboard_queries.py) | SQL query builder | 400+ | ✅ Done |
| [test_scoring_engine.py](../tests/test_scoring_engine.py) | Unit tests | 500+ | ✅ Done |
| [IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md) | Migration guide | 800+ | ✅ Done |

**Total**: ~4,100 lines of production-ready code and documentation

---

## Questions & Support

### Common Questions

**Q: Can I keep using my current CSV-based system while testing this?**  
A: Yes! The new system runs in parallel. Import your CSV data, validate scores match, then switch over when ready.

**Q: Do I need to change my care log export process?**  
A: No. The ETL script handles CSV imports. Eventually you may want direct database integration, but CSV works fine to start.

**Q: What if my thresholds don't match the design?**  
A: Thresholds are configurable in the `dim_domain` table and `scoring_engine.py` constants. Update them to match your care plans.

**Q: How do I handle multiple care homes?**  
A: The `dim_client` table supports multiple organizations. Each has its own residents. The executive grid shows all clients in one view.

**Q: Is this CQC-ready?**  
A: Yes. The design explicitly addresses CQC Safe, Effective, Caring, Responsive standards. Score calculations are transparent and defensible.

**Q: What about GDPR/data security?**  
A: The database stores resident names and care data. Follow your organization's data protection policies. Consider:
- Password-protected dashboard (already implemented)
- Database encryption
- Access control
- Audit logging

### Getting Help

- **Design Questions**: See [SYSTEM_DESIGN.md](SYSTEM_DESIGN.md)
- **Implementation**: See [IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md)
- **Scoring Logic**: See comments in [scoring_engine.py](scoring_engine.py)
- **Database Schema**: See comments in [schema.sql](schema.sql)

---

## Success Criteria

✅ **System is complete when**:
1. All historical data imported
2. Scores calculated for all residents
3. Executive grid displays correctly
4. Drill-down navigation works
5. Score calculations are transparent
6. Audit reports can be generated
7. Nightly scoring is automated
8. Users are trained
9. CQC inspectors can use the system

---

## Credits

**Design Philosophy**: Risk intelligence, not care management. Focus on audit defensibility and transparent calculations.

**Database**: PostgreSQL star schema for scalability and performance.

**Scoring**: Dual scores (CRS + DCS) with fixed thresholds, no machine learning, no black boxes.

**Dashboard**: Three-layer progressive disclosure (grid → client → resident).

**Testing**: 31 unit tests ensuring all formulas work as documented.

---

**Ready to implement?** Start with [IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md](IMPLEMENTATION_ROADMAP.md) Phase 1.
